docs(ipp): add Inference Payload Processor documentation (#1884)
llm-d/llm-d: docs/architecture/advanced/ipp/plugins.md

# IPP Plugins Reference

The Inference Payload Processor (IPP) uses a plugin-based architecture that allows extensible request processing. This document describes all in-tree plugins, their purpose, configuration, and expected inputs/outputs.

## Plugin Categories

IPP plugins are organized into two categories:

| Category | Purpose | When Executed |
|----------|---------|---------------|
| **Request Handling** | Process incoming inference requests | Before routing decision |

> | **Data Layer** | Collect and extract metadata from events | Continuously (event-driven) |

Reviewer: Request Handling layer can be used also to handle responses.. even though we don't have in-tree plugins for response handling, we should probably add documentation about it (e.g., response happens AFTER routing on the way back and not before routing decision). 
we also need to describe the concept of multiple profiles and profile picker.

additionally, we should probably add here the Model Selector plguins (Filter/Scorer/Picker).

---

## Request Handling Plugins

These plugins process the inference request before routing.

### body-field-to-header

Extracts a field from the request body and sets it as an HTTP header.

**Type:** `body-field-to-header`

**Input:**
- Request body containing the configured field (e.g., `{"model": "llama-70b", ...}`)

**Output:**
- HTTP header set with the extracted value (e.g., `X-Gateway-Model-Name: llama-70b`)

**Configuration:**
```yaml
parameters:
  fieldName: "model"           # Field to extract from body
  headerName: "X-Gateway-Model-Name"  # Header to set
```

**Behavior:**
- If field doesn't exist in body → records metric, logs at VERBOSE level, continues without error
- If field is empty → records metric, logs at VERBOSE level, continues without error

> - Converts any type to string representation via `fmt.Sprintf("%v", value)`

Reviewer: specifying the fmt.Sprintf is too much information.

---

### base-model-to-header

Maps a model name (potentially a LoRA adapter) to its base model and sets a routing header.

**Type:** `base-model-to-header`

**Input:**
- Request body with `model` field
- ConfigMap(s) with model mappings (watched via Kubernetes reconciler)

**Output:**
- HTTP header: `X-Gateway-Base-Model-Name: <base-model>`

**Configuration:**

> This plugin requires ConfigMaps with the label `inference.llm-d.ai/ipp-managed: "true"` in the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This plugin requires ConfigMap(s) with the label `inference.llm-d.ai/ipp-managed: "true"` in the following format:
```

Reviewer: also its worth adding a note that the reconciler assumes models in the configmap should be unique. 
atm we don't handle the case that a model appears more than once.

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: qwen-adapters
  labels:
    inference.llm-d.ai/ipp-managed: "true"
data:
  baseModel: "Qwen/Qwen3-32B"
  adapters: |
    - food-review-1
    - sentiment-analyzer
    - code-assistant
```

**Behavior:**
1. Extracts `model` field from request body
2. Looks up model in the adapters store:
   - If model is a LoRA adapter → returns its base model
   - If model is a registered base model → returns itself
   - If model is unknown → returns empty string
3. Sets `X-Gateway-Base-Model-Name` header

> **Use Case:** Enables Gateway HTTPRoute rules to route based on base model, allowing multiple LoRA adapters to be served by the same InferencePool.

Reviewer: we should phrase here something around enables single entrypoint for serving multiple inference pools

---

### model-selector

> Orchestrates a Filter → Score → Pick pipeline to automatically select a model from candidates. This plugin uses **Scorer** and **Picker** components (defined below) to make selection decisions.

Reviewer: the second sentence is repeating the first one.
```suggestion
Orchestrates a Filter → Score → Pick pipeline to automatically select a model from candidates.
```

**Type:** `model-selector`

**Input:**
- Candidate models from the Datastore
- Request context and body

**Output:**
- Selected model name written to `request.Body["model"]`

**Configuration:**

> The model-selector plugin is wired with Scorers and Pickers by listing them in the profile's `request` section. All plugins following `model-selector` that implement Scorer, Filter, or Picker interfaces are automatically added to its pipeline:

Reviewer: we should first define the concept of profile and profile picker. otherwise this is not clear where profile comes from. 
also, we should show a filter example (WIP PR here: https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-inference-payload-processor/pull/172)

Reviewer: also it would be good to define the PreProcessors and PostProcessors sections.

```yaml
plugins:
  - type: model-selector
  - type: cost-scorer
  - type: max-score-picker
profiles:
  - name: default
    plugins:
      request:
        - pluginRef: model-selector
        - pluginRef: cost-scorer
          weight: 1.0
        - pluginRef: max-score-picker
```

**Behavior:**
1. Loads candidate models from Datastore
2. Runs Filter plugins (if any) to eliminate candidates
3. Runs Scorer plugins to assign scores to each candidate (scores are multiplied by weight)
4. Runs Picker plugin to select final model
5. Writes selected model name back to request body

**Error:** Returns error if no candidate models are available.

#### Available Scorers

Scorers assign a score (0.0 to 1.0) to each candidate model. Multiple scorers can be combined.

> ##### cost-scorer

Reviewer: a general comment:
we should put a README.md alongside each plugin. a person who is writing a plugin should update the README.md of the plugin. 
in the doc here we should avoid repeating the explanation about plugins, and instead should only link to those README files of the plugins. 

for example:
https://github.com/llm-d/llm-d-inference-payload-processor/blob/main/pkg/framework/plugins/modelselector/picker/maxscore/README.md

I know that most of the plugins are currently missing this README. we need to create issues/PRs in IPP repo to fix it instead of documenting the plugins here which will get out of sync very quickly cause it's a completely separate repo.

Scores models based on their price. Lower-priced models receive higher scores.

**Type:** `cost-scorer`

**Input:**
- Models with `price` attribute (USD per 1M tokens)

**Output:**
- Score map: `{model: score}` where score ∈ [0.0, 1.0]

**Scoring Formula:**
```
score = 1.0 - (price / sum_of_all_prices)
```

**Special Cases:**
- Single model → score = 0.5
- All prices = 0 → all scores = 1.0

##### inflight-requests-scorer

Scores models based on current in-flight request load. Models with fewer in-flight requests receive higher scores.

**Type:** `inflight-requests-scorer`

**Input:**
- Models with `request-metadata` attribute (from `request-metadata-extractor`)

**Output:**
- Score map based on in-flight request counts

**Use Case:** Load balancing across models.

> #### Available Pickers

Reviewer: all pickers have README.md files
